=Sanction
A role based permissions management system designed to have an intuitive and useful API making an authorization system easy and painless. (Even Fun!)

Sanction works on the basis of principals and permissionables. Principals are those classes which can hold agency over a permissionable. In the initial
configuration of Sanction, you declare your principal and permissionable classes. These do not have to be disjoint sets. After setting up the principals
and permissionables, Sanction employs the concept of a role, as being an arbitrary token acting over the relationship of a set of principals mapped to a 
set of permissionables. The final stage of the Sanction configuration involves declaring these role definitions.

One of the key advantages of Sanction is to be able to easily access these principals or permissionables, depending on the interest of the query. This 
allows for generating a list of permissionables for a given principal with a certain role without having to iterate over a result set.

<b>Enough with text, how about some quick examples:</b>

How about getting all of the Users that are Magazine Editors?
  User.has(:editor).over(Magazine) #=> [Users]
    
Or maybe you need to know if a specific user can read a page, without knowing their roles.
  @user.has(:can_read).over?(@page) #=> true/false
  
Need to list all of the Magazines a user can edit?
  Magazine.for(@user).with(:can_edit) #=> [Magazines]

Is this user a super user?
  @user.has?(:super_user) #=> true/false

You can even throw your own named scopes into the mix, or chain on an ActiveRecord find()
  User.active.has(:admin) #=> [Users]
  Magazine.published.for(@user).with(:editor).find(:all, :conditions => {:subject => "Programming"}) #=> [Magazines]
  
How about giving and removing permissions?
  @user.grant(:editor, @magazine)
  @user.revoke(:editor, @magazine)
  @user.revoke(:super_user)
  
Notice the grammer of the sentences. What you start with is what you end up with i.e., start your sentence with your desired objects. 
If you just need a true/false answer, throw a ? on the last method. How much simpler could it get?

<b>There are more examples at the end of this document.</b>  

<b>Features</b>
  - Intuitive API calls that can be composed to form sentences / questions based from principal or permissionable.
  - Ability to chain custom scopes / finders into or after the Sanction role query api.
  - Easily gather sets of principals or permissionables matching role criteria.

=Install

After cloning / downloading, use:

  script/generate sanction

This will stub out the config/initializers/sanction.rb used for configuration and will produce a migration for your roles table.
Be sure to rake db:migrate to produce the roles table.

=Config

===Example

  Sanction.configure do |config|
    config.principals      = [Person, Login, User]
    config.permissionables = [Person, Magazine]
    
    config.role :reader, Person => Magazine, :having => [:can_read]
    config.role :editor, Person => Magazine, :having => [:can_edit],  :includes => [:reader]
    config.role :writer, Person => Magazine, :having => [:can_write], :includes => [:reader]
    config.role :owner,  Person => Magazine, :includes => [:editor, :writer]

    config.role :super_user, Person => :global
    config.role :boss,       Person => Person
    config.role :admin,      [Person, Login, User] => :all, :having => :anything
  end
===Details
<b>Declaring Principals</b>
  
In establishing the principal classes, you can supply an array of principals. Each of these principal classes
will be injected with the appropriate API methods / scopes / and associations that constitute a Principal model within Sanction.

<b>Declaring Permissionables</b>

In establishing the permissionable classes, you can supply an array of permissionables. Each of these permissionable classes
will be injected with the appropriate API methods / scopes / and associations that constitute a Permissionable model within Sanction.

<b>Declaring Roles</b>

In Sanction a role is defined as a name along with a relationship hash. When declaring this role additional options can also be declared.

  config.role role_name, relationship, options
  
* role_name: an arbitrary string/symbol
* relationship: a hash entry, defined as a set of Principals mapping to a set of Permissionables. Special tokens exist for mapping
  to all permissionables(:all), or creating a role that is outside the context of permissionables (:global).
  * :all

    config.role :admin, Person => :all

  * :global

    config.role :super_user, Person => :global

* Additional Options are:
  * :includes

    allows you to declare a set of roles that are included in this role. When using includes, you must "include" a role that has already 
    been defined previously within the configuration, in order to inherit the permissions. You can not, therefore use a self referential include. 
    Violating this will not cause an error, but rather, you will not inherit any permissions from that undefined role.

  * :having

    allows you to declare a set of finer grain permissions that this role responds to. These can be shared across roles, to allow for:
      config.role :reader, Person => Magazine, :having => [:can_read]
      config.role :editor, Person => Magazine, :having => [:can_read]
    In this example, asking for Person.has(:can_read) will yield both readers and editors
  
    * :anything

        config.role :admin, Person => :all, :having => :anything
      by using :having => :anything, any query to has() will return positive for that role, which can be useful for
      "super user" type roles.

=API
<b>Principal Methods</b>

Each of the following methods are injected at the instance and class level.

* <tt>has(*roles)</tt>

  provide any number of roles to look for. This is interpretted as asking looking for a principal that has ANY of these roles. Returns the principal objects matching.
  can be supplied :any, to wildcard the search for any role.

* <tt>has?(*roles)</tt>

  the boolean form of has, returns true/false.

* <tt>has_all?(*roles)</tt>

  You can end a "sentence" with this method, allowing you to ask for ALL roles to be present. This is a more expensive operation, conducting a search on each role supplied as an argument.
  The nature of the _all methods prevents further chaining.

* <tt>over(*permissionables)</tt>

  provide any number of permissionable instances or Klasses. This is interpretted as asking for principals having permissions over any of these permissionables. Returns the principal
  objects matching. can be supplied :any, to wildcard the search for any permissionable.

* <tt>over?(*permissionables)</tt>

  The boolean form of over, returns true/false.

* <tt>over_all?(*permissionables)</tt>

  You can end a "sentence" with this method, allowing you to ask for a principal who has permission over ALL of these permisisonables. Again, this is subject to the _all
  exception, in that this method prevents further chaining.

* <tt>grant(role_name, [permissionable])</tt>

  Assign a role to a principal over an optional permissionable. Validated against the current Sanction::Role::Definition .

* <tt>revoke(role_name, [permissionable])</tt>

  Remove a role. Use the same signature provided to grant.

* <tt>total</tt>

  [Only as a Class Method]
  This method is a helper for the COUNT QUIRK mentioned below.

<b>Permissionable Methods</b>

Each of the following methods are injected at the instance and class level. (Except the total method)

* <tt>with(*roles)</tt>

  provide any number of roles to look for. This is interpreted as asking for a permissionable governed by a principal with any of these roles. (READ: OR search). Returns the permissionable objects
  matching.

* <tt>with?(*roles)</tt>

  The boolean form of with(*roles), returns true/false.

* <tt>with_all?(*roles)</tt>

  The _all version of with(*roles).

* <tt>for(*principals)</tt>

  Provide any number of principals, for which you are searching for having a role/permission over the root permissionable.

* <tt>for?(*principals)</tt>

  The boolean form for for(*principals), returns true/false.

* <tt>for_all?(*principals)</tt>

  The _all version of for(*principals).

* <tt>authorize(role_name, principal)</tt>

  Must provide a role name and principal.

* <tt>unauthorize(role_name, principal)</tt>

  Match the authorize call, to remove that entry.

* <tt>total</tt>

  [Only as a Class Method]
  For the COUNT QUIRK.

<b>Rake tasks</b>

* <tt>rake sanction:role:describe</tt>
* <tt>rake sanction:role:validate</tt>
* <tt>rake sanction:role:cleanse</tt>

=Many More Examples

  Sanction.configure do |config|
    config.principals      = [Person]
    config.permissionables = [Person, Magazine]
    
    config.role :reader, Person => Magazine, :having => [:can_read]
    config.role :editor, Person => Magazine, :having => [:can_edit],  :includes => [:reader]
    config.role :writer, Person => Magazine, :having => [:can_write], :includes => [:reader]
    config.role :owner,  Person => Magazine, :includes => [:editor, :writer]

    config.role :boss,   Person => Person
  end

  Person.grant(:reader, Magazine.first)
    # => Grants the :reader role for all People over Magazine (1)

  Person.find(2).grant(:editor, Magazine.find(2))
    # => Grants the :editor role for Person (2) over Magazine (2)

  Person.find(3).grant(:owner, Magazine)
    # => Grants the :owner role for Person (3) over all Magazines

  Person.has?(:any)
    # => Are there people who have any roles?
    # => true

  Person.has?(:can_edit)
    # => Are there people who can edit?
    # => True

  Person.has(:can_edit).over?(Magazine.first)
    # => Are there people who can edit Magazine(1) ?
    # => True

  Person.has(:can_edit)
    # => List people who can edit
    # => Person (2,3)
 
  Person.has(:editor)
    # => List people who have editor 
    # => Person (2,3)

  Person.has(:owner)
    # => List people who have owner
    # => Person (3)

  Person.has(:can_edit).over(Magazine.find(3))
    # => List people who can edit Magazine (3)
    # => Person (3)

  Magazine.for(Person.find(3)).with(:can_edit)
    # => List the magazines that Person (3) :can_edit
    # => Magazine.all

  Magazine.for(Person.find(3)).with(:can_edit).find(:all, :conditions => ["magazines.created_at > ?", (Time.now - 1.week)])
    # => List the magazines that Person (3) :can_edit with additional conditions.

  Person.find(1).grant(:boss, Person.find(3))
    # => Grants Person (1) to be the boss over Person (3) [ Gratz ]

  Person.has(:can_edit).over(Magazine.find(2)).for(Person.first).with(:boss)
    # => Returns the people who have editor over Magazine(2) and also have Person(1) as a boss

  Person.first.has?(:editor)
    # => Check if Person(1) has :editor role
    # => false
  
  Person.find(2).has?(:editor)
    # => Check if Person(2) has :editor role
    # => true

  Person.find(2).has(:editor).over?(Magazine.first)
    # => Check if Person(2) has :editor role over Magazine(1)
    # => false
  
  Person.find(2).has(:editor).over?(Magazine.find(2))
    # => Check if Person(2) has :editor role over Magazine(2)
    # => true

So a potential application code example might be:

* In the controller

    # Find all magazines that the Person has some role over
    @person = Person.find(parms[:person_id])
    @magazines = Magazine.for(@person)
    @magazines_for_editing = Magazine.for(@person).with(:can_edit)

=Testing
To run the Sanction test suite, which was generated with the help of plugin_a_week's plugin_test_helper, step into the
vendor/plugins/sanction and run rake test.

=Quirks
<b>Count</b>

Performing a '.count' at the end of a Sanction query, with its implied count(*), can lead to misleading totals. The best thing of course is to:
  
  .count(:all, :select => "DISTINCT tablename.primary_key")

so we have a helper method to do just this. Each principal/permissionable has a class method:
  
  Person.total
  Magazine.total
  Magazines::Article.total

Append that at the end of any query:

  Person.has(:editor).total

To get the accurate size.

=Comments/Questions
Let us know matthewvermaak [at] gmail {dot} com / peterleonhardt {at} gmail [dot] com

Copyright (c) 2009 Matthew Vermaak & Peter Leonhardt, released under the MIT license
